---
layout: post
title:  "Policy Support to Corporate Social Responsibilty"
author: SHA
categories: [ company-law, income-tax ]
image: "/assets/images/19.jpg"

---

Businesses without addressing the needs and expectations of stakeholders in a community cannot remain competitive in the contemporary era. A strategic approach to Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) can bring benefits in terms of building reputation, brand value, customer relationships, operational risk management,  driving  up efficiency,  access to new markets  and better  human resource management through employee motivation and retention. Responsible business conduct is especially important when private sector operators provide public services. CSR offers a set of values on which a more cohesive society can be built and on which the transition to a sustainable financial and economic system can be based. Enhancing CSR as a means for poverty reduction and sustainable development in a developing country like ours with modest resources requires joint initiatives by all stakeholder  groups  involved:  governmental  bodies,  NGOs,  and corporations,  as  well  as  primary  producers  and  workers.  Only through co- operation of stakeholders at all levels CSR can have a beneficial social and developmental impact.  Moreover, multi-stakeholder initiatives are  an appropriate tool for experience-sharing and the development of best practices for creating a link between corporate insight and the government agenda.

### Roles and Challenges of Government Bodies:
CSR policy in theory is supposed to function as a built-in, self-regulating mechanism, whereas in practice, CSR will thrive in the context of a consistently applied and enforced set of minimum environmental and social standards only through the right mix of policies from government bodies.
Governments are expected to play four key roles:  mandating  (legislative), facilitating  guidelines  on  content,  fiscal  and  funding  mechanisms,  creating  framework conditions), partnering (engagement in multi-stakeholder  processes, stimulating dialogue) and endorsing (publicity). Throughout these roles, they can switch  gears  as  they  deem  appropriate,  between  soft  incentives  and  hard regulation.
Forms of legal incentives can range from private and voluntary codes, to certification and labeling schemes to transparency or reporting guidelines. Legal incentives as appealing as they may sound often lack the legitimacy and enforcement mechanisms of tougher law. On the other hand, the problem with the regulatory or hard approach is that, the private sector may switch to a box- ticking or compliance mode without genuine commitment or concrete substance, gradually  compromising  the  voluntary  character  of  CSR,  one  of  its  defining features. The central challenge for governments’  progression is the question of how to more effectively manage the costs and benefits of business activity and to foster business engagement in national policy processes. In other words, governments  need  to  identify  various  forms  of  intervention  that  can  more effectively  harness  the  strengths  of  the  private  sector  and  can  also  foster alignment between CSR strategies and the pursuit of overall public policy goals.
The real challenge is to deploy the right types of soft/hard incentives and cross- sector partnerships  that serve the public interest; and to create a stimulating and enabling environment for businesses to create long-term added social value.

### Why developing country governments should be interested in CSR:
There are two broad sets of justifications for public sector actors in middle and low-income countries to be engaged with CSR. One is defensive and other one is proactive.  But  these  two  are  not  mutually  exclusive.  A  policy  initiative  that initially  has a defensive  justification  may  quickly  become  part  of a proactive strategy of engagement.
The defensive justification relates to minimizing the potential adverse effects of CSR  on  local  communities,  environments  and  markets  when  it  is  imposed through  international  supply  chains  and  investment.  For increasing  domestic public benefits of CSR practices in economic, social and environmental terms, the engagement of public sector actors in CSR activities provides the proactive justification.
From  a  sustainable  development  perspective,  public  sector  engagement  with CSR  potentially  spans  social,  economic  and  environmental  spheres,  including issues of corruption,  poverty reduction  and human rights. The goals of public sector  engagement  in CSR  are likely  to differ  from  country  to country.  They might be structured in relation to the underlying drivers for public engagement in CSR.
In a tax system, a Government may promote CSR, amongst others, by the adoption of environment-friendly  tax policies, such as taxes on consumption of fossil fuels or on polluting processes and reliefs for socially desirable expenditure.

### Income Tax Regulation in Bangladesh on CSR:
National  Board of Revenue (NBR) of Bangladesh  issued Statutory  Regulatory Order (SRO) by providing tax exemption on the expenditure made by corporates for  CSR  activities  in  2011.  The  regulations  stated  in that  SRO  were  further amended  in  2012  and  the area of CSR applicable for tax exemption  was enhanced.  The rules of tax exemption for CSR activities of corporates are mentioned below:
* Any company  will get exemption  of Income  Tax at the rate of 10% for actual cost/money expended in Corporate Social Responsibility.
* Conditions for Income Tax Exemptions-
  * It will not be applicable for the amount expended in excess of 20% of gross income of the company or BDT 8 (eight) crore whichever is lower.
  * The companies which are interested to attain tax exemption facility as corporate entity, they-
    * have to pay salary-allowance of their employee-staffs regularly and must have waste treatment plant in their factory/industry especially if industrial goods are manufactured.
    * must pay income tax, VAT, duty and repay institutional debt/obligations regularly.
    * can donate to the institutions under CSR only approved by Government.
    * must comply with all regulations of Bangladesh Labor Act, 2006.
    * cannot  treat  the  amount  expended  under  CSR  as  an  accredited expenses  in  Manufacturing  Account,  Commercial  Account  or  Profit- Loss Account.
    * have to submit necessary documents/evidences  for claiming the tax exemption on CSR to the concerned Deputy Tax Commissioner.
    * have to submit CSR Work Plan by the company to NBR in written for availing Income Tax Exemption Certificate.
  
  * Fields/Sectors of CSR applicable for tax exemption
  
    * Aid  through  any  government  body  for  reducing  mass  crisis  in natural  disaster  (Hurricane,  Tremor,  Cyclone  and Flood)  affected area.
    * Aid to organizations establishing and operating old homes.
    * Aid to any social organization pursuing welfare activities for mentally and physically challenged persons.
    * Aid to education institutions operating for teaching rootless children.
    * Aid to organizations pursuing housing projects for slam dwellers.
	* Aid to social organizations pursuing women empowerment and anti- dowry campaign.
	* Aid  to  organizations  pursuing  subsistence  and  rehabilitation  of orphan and rootless children.
	* Aid to organizations involved in independence war related research, recovery and expanding of independence  war spirit and honorable living of freedom fighters.
	* Aid to organizations involved in healthy sanitation activities Hilly Chittagong, Char region and River Eroded regions.
	* Aid to institutions providing medical treatment to cleft lip, cataract and cancer.
	* Aid  to  people  and  organization  involved  in  medical  treatment activities of acid victims.
	* Aid to hospitals providing free medical services to poor patients and specialized hospital improving medical treatment like cancer, liver and kidney diseases, thalassemia, ophthalmology, cardiology etc.
	* Aid to public universities.
	* Aid to government affiliated educational institutions in order to provide scholarship or financial aid to children of poor freedom fighter including poor brilliant students for technical or vocational education.
    * Aid to government or MPO listed non-government educational institutions to set up laboratory for computer or IT training or English language training.
	* Aid to institute providing technical or vocational training to unskilled or semi-skilled labors for manpower export.
    * Aid to institute providing sports training or development services at national level.
	* Aid to museum (built or under construction) for preserving memory of independence war.
	* Aid to any institution at national level involved in preserving memory of the father of the nation.
	* Aid to the fund formed under Prime Minister's Education Assistance Trust Act, 2012
	* Aid to non profitable and non government voluntary social welfare organization working for operating rehabilitation center for medical treatment and awareness building on HIV, AIDS and Narcotics.
	* Aid to non profitable and non government voluntary social welfare organization    working   for   operating   rehabilitation    center   for recovered children and women from trafficking.

### CSR activities of banks in Bangladesh:
Historically, the banking sector of Bangladesh has been amply participating in various social activities especially, in the areas of education, health, sports, benevolent activities like donations to different charitable organizations, to poor people  and  religious  institutions,  city  beautification  and  patronizing  art  & culture, etc.In   June   2008,   Bangladesh   Bank   issued   a   comprehensive   circular   titled
‘Mainstreaming Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) in banks and financial institutions in Bangladesh’. In that circular, CSR was defined as (i) considering the   economic,   social   and   environmental   consequences   of   a   business,   (ii) mitigating the negative impacts and bolstering the benign effects, (iii) initiating action programs and community investments to trim down social exclusion and inequality  as well  as to address  the core sustainable  development  challenges (fulfilling  the  requirements  of  the  current  generation  without  cramping  the capacity of future generations is a generally agreed meaning of ‘sustainable development’).
BB has been motivating  banks to expand lending to the under-served  sectors both as business case and CSR obligation; expecting to lead to more broad-based inclusive growth, and therefore reduce poverty. BB has indicated some priority areas  in the field  of CSR  like Self-employment  and SME  credits  designed  to create  productive   new  on-farm/off-farm   employment;   Financing   of  biomass processing  plants,  solar  panels,  waste  recycling  plants,  Effluent  Treatment Plants  (ETPs);  Credit  programs  for  diversified  production  of  crops,  oilseeds, spices, vegetables, fruits etc.; Mobile phone based/MFI supported programs for prompt delivery of remittances; card based/mobile phone based delivery of financial services; Financing programs to promote domestic tourism and markets in cultural products/events.
Bangladesh Bank has, of course, started guiding the banking sector to become more environmentally responsive (e.g. via refinancing new loan products on solar energy, bio-gas, effluent treatment plant etc). All the commercial banks are asked to formulate their own CSR policy with the annual outlay for CSR programs and include  the  CSR  programs  in  their  mainstream  banking  activities  instead  of short-term social works like providing grants, aids and donations. In December 2010, Bangladesh Bank instructed the banks to establish separate CSR desk to
pay special attention on this issue.

Reporting of the CSR initiatives by banks was suggested as appendage to regular annual financial reports, ultimately to build up full length wide-ranging reports in the Green Reporting  Initiatives  (GRI) format. Alike the statutory  financial reports, the CSR reports were also anticipated to be publicly available for stakeholders’ perusal.
Bangladesh Bank has been publishing CSR review report annually for tracing advancement  in  mainstreaming  of  CSR  activities.  CSR  initiatives  of  banks during last five years continued focus on i) financial inclusion of less privileged population segments and underserved  economic sectors, ii) emergency relief in humanitarian distresses, ii) promotion of health, education and cultural/recreational  activities  for  advancement  and  well  being  of underprivileged  population  segments,  iii)  financing  and  promotion  of environment friendly projects, iv) adoption of energy efficient, carbon footprint reducing internal processes and practices in own offices and establishments.
Besides CSR initiatives involving direct expenditure, financial inclusion initiatives of banks proceeded apace during last five years. All banks participated actively in promotion of lending to SMEs and agricultural. For broader, deeper financial inclusion, banks proceeded ahead on multiple fronts including increased rural bank branch presence, mobile phone banking,  and opening  of bank accounts for low income population free of charge with nominal Taka 10 initial deposit.
In 2013, CSR expenditure of banks totaled 4.42 billion taka; eight times larger than in 2009. It will not be an overstatement to say that the banking sector led
CSR initiatives in Bangladesh.

### Conclusion:
Globally, banks pursue CSR practices from self initiative. Central bank usually doesn't intervene in their CSR activities or provide any directives to motivate banks for participating in CSR activities. But, in case of Bangladesh, the central bank provided regulatory framework to banks for CSR activities and monitors that in a regular fashion. Bangladesh Bank is one of the members of United Nations Global Compact(UNGC) concentrating  in  the  areas  of  human rights, labor standards, the environment and  anti- corruption.
Bangladesh  Bank being the chair of the Steering Committee  of UNGC Bangladesh  Local Network is actively leading CSR issues and implementation  of CSR activities in financial sector as well as facilitates social investments in Bangladesh.
Bangladesh  Bank  in  association  with  CSR  Centre,  Bangladesh  playing  a  major  role  in different programs involving social, economic and environmental aspects.
Bangladesh Bank Disaster Management and Corporate Social Responsibility Fund of Taka 5 Crore has been established in BB where 2.29 crore has already been disbursed for different projects addressing health, education, environment, disaster management and Human Resources Development/Capacity Building.As Bangladesh is a developing country, both central bank and revenue collector of government  have to take proactive steps for fostering growth and economic development.   Moreover,   in  a  country   like  Bangladesh,   poverty   alleviation through minimizing income disparity is one of the top priorities. In that context, BB  devises  supervisory  policies  in  such  a manner,  especially  for  last  several years, so that banks not only move forward for their own growth, but also can
support the development initiatives of the government. On the other hand, NBR too has provided tax incentive on CSR activities aimed towards motivating sustainable development activities.
Since the issuance of CSR directive by BB and SRO on after tax incentive from NBR, the involvement of banks in CSR activities has augmented in many folded aspects.   Banks'   rapidly   increasing   participation   in   CSR   activities   with incorporation   of   socially   and   environmentally   accountable   organizational objectives,   strategies   and  operations   that  are  swiftly   turning   into   global standards   in   “socially   responsible   competition”   towards   rearing   inclusive economic and social growth and facilitate the nation to go forward with desired growth and efficient allocation of resources. Surely the collaborative effort by the concerned government bodies will further increase the CSR activities by banks which will support sustainable development drive of the Bangladesh.
